---
title: "05. Func. Programming 3"
week: 3
original_author: Boyan Ding, Einar Balan
originally_written: 2024-09-27
lecture_date: 2024-10-14
author: Einar Balan
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

{: .note}
This lecture covers slides 80-112 of the Intro to Functional Programming deck. 

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

## Intermediate Topics Cont.

We'll pick up where we left off last time: higher order functions!

### Map, Filter, and Reduce

Here we introduce a key set of higher-order utility functions to process lists that are included in virtually all functional programming languages.

These functions fall into three categories: mappers, filters and reducers.

- A **mapper** function performs a one-to-one transformation from one list of values to another list of values using a _transform function_
- A **filter** function filters out items from one list of values using a _predicate function_ to produce another list of values
- A **reducer** function operates on a list of values and collapses them into a single output value

We typically use one or more mappers and filters followed by one or more reducers to crunch data, e.g.: `result = reduce(map(filter(input)))`. 

#### Map 

A mapper function **maps a list of values to another list of values** of the same length. 
Here are a few example mapper functions:

| Map each string in a list to uppercase | Map each name in a list to a tuple of (last,first) |
| `["foo","bar"]` returns `["FOO ","BAR"]` | `["Andy Liu","Tia Tan"]` returns `[("Liu","Andy"),("Tan","Tia")]` |

| Map every prime number in a list to True, every other number to False | Map each number in a list to its absolute value |
| `[2,3,4,5,6]` returns `[True,True,False,True,False]` | `[20,-30,-27,45]` returns `[20,30,27,45]` |


Haskell provides a mapper function called `map` that accepts two parameters:

1. A function to apply to every element of a list
2. A list to operate on

The type signature of map is: `map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]`

- The first argument is a function that maps an individual item from a value of type `a` to a value of type `b` (`a` and `b` can be the same)
- The second argument is a list of type `a`
- The return value is a list of type `b`

We can define some functions to use with `map`:

```hs
-- mappy.hs
cube :: Double -> Double
cube x = x^3

one_over  :: Double -> Double
one_over x = 1/x

is_even :: Int -> Bool
is_even x = x `mod` 2 == 0
```

```console
ghci> :load mappy
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( mappy.hs, interpreted )
ghci> map cube [2,4,10]
[8,64,1000]
ghci> map one_over [2,4,8]
[.5,.25,.125]
ghci> map is_even [1,2,3,4,6]
[False,True,False,True,True]
ghci> map reverse ["mouse","cat","fly"] 
["esuom","tac","ylf"]
```

In the last invocation, we used Haskell's library function `reverse`.

So how does the map function actually work? It's simple. We can use the pattern matching we just learned to implement it.

```hs
-- map.hs
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map func [] = []      
map func (x:xs) =
  (func x) : map func xs
```

#### Filter

A filter is a function that **filters items from an input list** to produce a new output list. 
Here are a few examples of filter functions:

| Filter all odd numbers from an input list | Filter all spaces from a String |
| `[1,2,3,4,5,6]` returns `[2,4,6]`| `"a man a plan a canal panama"` returns `"amanaplanancanalpanama"` |

Haskell provides a function called `filter` that accepts two parameters:

1. A function that determines if an item in the input list should be included in the output list
2. A list to operate on

The type signature of filter is: `filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]`

- The first argument is a predicate function that determines if a value from the input list should be included in the output
- The second argument is a list of type `a`
- The returned list include all the items that passed the filter

The filter function can also be easily implemented using guards as follows:

```hs
filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]
filter predicate [] = []
filter predicate (x:xs)
 | (predicate x) = x : (filter predicate xs)
 | otherwise = filter predicate xs
```

#### Reducers 

The last of the three is called a reducer. A reducer is a function that **combines the values in an input list to produce a single output value**.

Here are some reducer examples;

| Reduce all the items from a list into a sum (or product) | Determine if any value in a list meets some requirement (e.g., is odd) |
| `[10,3,7]` returns `20` | `[2,4,6,8]` returns `False` |
| `[10,3,7]` returns `210`| `[2,4,5,8]` returns `True` |

| Count the # of people with each last name from a list of tuples | Append each word in a list into a single string, adding spaces in between |
| `[("Li","Ari"),("Li","Sam"), ("Bui","Tom"), ("Li","Ann")]` returns `[("Li",3),("Bui",1)]` | `["I","like","candy"]` returns `"I like candy "` |

Each reducer takes three inputs:

1. A function that processes each of the elements
2. An initial "accumulator" value
3. A list of items to operate on

Haskell has two different reducer functions: `foldl` and `foldr`. Let's learn about `foldl`!

Let's first look at the pseudocode for `foldl`

```
foldl(f, initial_accum, lst):
  accum = initial_accum
  for each x in lst:
    accum = f(accum, x)
  return accum
```

The core logic of `foldl` all happens around the accumulator variable `accum`:

- It is first set with the initial value `initial_accum`, the second argument to the function. The initial value can often be 0, 1 or an empty list
- Next, the `accum` is updated as we loop through each item in the list. Each time the function `f` is used to "accumulate" the item to `accum`.
- In the end, the final value of `accum` is returned.

Here is one example `f` function for `foldl`.

```hs
f1 :: Int -> Int -> Int
f1 accum x = accum + x
```

If the function `f1` is used in place of argument `f`, `foldl` computes the sum of the elements in the list `lst`. 

{: .note}
When trying to deciper what a reducer is doing, it's helpful to create a simple example and run through the pseudocode above by hand!

Now let's see the Haskell code for `foldl`:

```hs
foldl f accum [] = accum
foldl f accum (x:xs) =
  foldl f new_accum xs
 where new_accum = (f accum x)
```

As you can see, each new value x is "folded" into the accumulator as it's processed.

- `foldl` is left-associative: `f( ... f(f(accum,x1),x2), ..., xn)`


#### Influencer Alert: map-filter-reduce

Nowadays, virtually all modern languages now implement the map-filter-reduce paradigm. Here are some examples from Python, Java and Javascript

```python
# Python map-reduce example
def adder(a,b):
  return a + b

nums = [1, 4, 9, 16]
roots = map(sqrt, nums)

sum_of_roots = reduce(adder, roots)
```

```java
// Java map-reduce example
List<Double> nums =
  Arrays.asList(1.0, 4.0, 9.0, 16.0);

double sum_of_roots = nums.stream()
        .map((n) -> Math.sqrt(n))
        .reduce(0, Double::sum);
```

```js
// JavaScript map-reduce example
function adder(total, num)
 { return total + num; }

var nums = [1, 4, 9, 16];
var roots = nums.map(Math.sqrt);
var sum_of_roots = roots.reduce(adder, 0);
```

Moreover, these functions form a new paradigm that has radically transformed the Internet, medicine, autonomous vehicles, and virtually every other field.

While mapping, filtering and reducing seem marginally useful when running on a small list of items on a single computer, they can be applied to a huge cluster of servers to process massive amount of data.

All of this is possible because these are pure functions that are stateless, so they can be run in parallel!

{: .note } 
If you're interested in exploring MapReduce in more detail, you should take CS 143!

## Advanced Topics

Now we are in the Functional Programming home stretch, where we are learning some more advanced functional programming. Many concepts covered here are actually the core of FP, so things will get ~interesting~ !

### Lambda Functions

We start from lambda functions. By definition, a lambda function is just like any other function, but it _does not have a function name_. 

For example, the corresponding lambda function of a normal function `cube x = x^3` is `\x -> x^3` in Haskell. The two functions are identical except the second does not have a name. Calling `(\x -> x^3) 3` gives you the same result as `cube 3`.

{: .note }
Having lambda functions is yet another manifestation of first-class functions in functional programming languages. They allow functions to be written as values without giving them a name, just like values of other types (integers, strings, etc.)

People may wonder what practical benefit lambda functions can bring. Sometimes it can make code easier to read. We can use lambdas in higher-order functions when we don't want to bother defining a whole new named function.

For example, with a lambda, we can create the following functions:

```hs
squarer lst = map (\x -> x^2) lst
cuber lst = map (\x -> x^3) lst
```

The `squarer` and `cuber` functions computes the square and cube of each item within the list. We don't need to define separate helper functions and the logic can be understood by looking at the one-liner code.

Ok, let's learn the syntax for defining a lambda function in Haskell. A lambda expression in Haskell is written as `\param_1 ... param_n -> expression`

- The lambda function starts with a backslash (`\`). [^2]
- Then you specify the name of one or more parameters, specified by spaces. These are called _bound_ variables.
- The dash-greater sequence (`->`) follows the list of parameters, separates them with the rest of lambda.
- Finally, we have the function's expression, which is what the function computes and returns.

[^2]: The back slash is supposed to resemble a λ.

Let's see some examples in the Haskell interpreter:

```console
ghci> (\x y -> x^3+y^2) 10 3
1009
```

In the example above, we create a lambda expression and call it with arguments `x=10` and `y=3`. Thus it computes `10^3+3^2` and returns 1009.

Here are two examples with `map`:

```console
ghci> map (\x -> 1/x) [3..5]
[0.3333333333333333,0.25,0.2]
ghci> map (\x -> take 2 x) ["Dog", "Cat"]
["Do","Ca"]
```

We can also assign a lambda function to a variable. After the assignment, we can call lambda just like we would call any other function.

```console
ghci> a_func = \x y -> x++y
ghci> a_func [1,2,3] [4,5]
[1,2,3,4,5]
```

{: .note }
Some may wonder, does assigning a lambda to a variable defeat the purpose of having _anonymous_ functions? In some sense, it does seem so. However, looking from another angle, lambda functions can be regarded as more fundamental than named functions. Defining a function like `a_func x y = x ++ y` can be regarded as syntatic sugar of `a_func = \x y -> x ++ y`.

<!-- 
section removed from slides:
Next, let's look at a fancier usage of lambda expression: using it to generate new functions! Look at the following code:

```hs
-- lambda.hs
wrapFuncWithAbs func = (\x -> abs (func x))

cubed x = x^3
twox = 2*x
```

Our function accepts an input function `func`, it builds a new function that computes `y=abs(func(x))` and returns that new function as output.

```console
ghci> :load lambda
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( lambda.hs, interpreted )
ghci> abs2x = wrapFuncWithAbs twox
ghci> abs2x (-42)
84
ghci> abscube = wrapFuncWithAbs (\z -> z^3)
27
```

Both `abs2x` and `abscube` are created from return values of `wrapFuncWithAbs` functions.

- The returned lambda assigned to `abs2x` is `\x -> abs (twox x)`
- Meanwhile, `abscube` is `\x -> abs ((\z -> z^3) x)`

Neat, right? We just generated two new functions from scratch! -->

### Closures

Let's take a closer look at what is happening with functions that generates other functions.

```hs
-- lambda.hs
slopeIntercept m b = (\x -> m*x + b)

twoxPlusOne = slopeIntercept 2 1
fivexPlusThree = slopeIntercept 5 3
```

In the example above, we created another function generator `slopeIntercept`:

- It accepts two parameters: `m` and `b`
- When called, it builds and returns a new function that takes argument `x` and computes `y = m*x + b`

Then we create a function `twoxPlusOne` by calling `slopeIntercept` with `m` equals to 2 and `b` equals to 1. In the process, Haskell "captures" the specific values of `m` and `b` along with the expression `\x -> m*x + b`. This way, when we next call `twoxPlusOne`. Haskell will use `m=2` and `b=1`.

```console
ghci> :load lambda
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( lambda.hs, interpreted )
ghci> twoxPlusOne 9
19
```

The combination of a _lambda expression_ with a snapshot of all _"captured" values_ (like `m` and `b`) is called a closure.

When we create another function with the same generator, the other function will have its own generator as well, such as the `fivexPlusThree` above. Its closure has different values of `m` and `b` than the one of `twoxPlusOne`.

How do we decide what variables are captured as part of a closure? In short, any variable that is "free" will be captured.

A **free variable** is any variable that is _not an explicit parameter_ to the lambda. For example, in `\x -> m*x + b`, `m` and `b` are free variables, and `x` is not.

{: .note }
Recall that in the context of a lambda, we call parameters **bound variables**. So if a variable is free it means it is not "bound" to any of the lambda's parameters. Makes sense!

Formally, a closure is a combination of the two things:

1. A function of zero or more arguments that we wish to run at  some point in the future
2. A list of "free" variables and their values that were captured at the time the closure was created

When a closure later runs, it uses the values of the free variables captured at the time it was created.

{: .note }
Note that the exact behavior of free variables may vary by language. In other words, Haskell uses the value as captured upon creation, but this might not be true for other languages.

People may wonder where the free variables are stored, because they are still available for use after the function that created the closure has returned. If they were stored on the stack, that would not be possible.

The answer is that they are often stored on the heap. Unlike C and C++ where local variables are managed on the stack, languages that support lambda expression and closure usually store the relevant information on the heap so that they can be used after the creator function returns. The storage is managed by garbage collectors and will be freed when the runtime decide that the captured variables cannot be referenced by anyone.

### Influencer Alert: Lambda and Closure

Nowadays, even in the languages that are not typically functional, you can often find that they support some form of lambda functions and closures. They are used when we want to pass a simple function to another function.

For example, in C++, we can use lambda to provide comparators for sorting:

```cpp
// C++ code that uses a lambda to sort a bunch of
// Students in alphabetical order.

vector<Student> students;
// ...
sort(students.begin(), students.end(),
    [](const Student & a, const Student & b)
    {
       return a.getName() < b.getName();
    });
```

In C++, we need to explicitly specify the free variables to capture inside the pair of brackets. Then we specify the arguments within the parentheses and the function body in the braces.

{: .note}
Note that C++ handles captures differently from most functional languages, but that's outside the scope of this class.

Javascript also has lambdas! Very often, we use them to create callbacks for event handling. The lambda function is created with the `function` keyword

```js
// javascript: Lambda function is called
// when the user clicks on the "big button"

// Select big button from HTML web page
var button = document.querySelector('#big-button');

// Specify the behavior when the button is clicked
button.addEventListener('click',
    function() { alert("A button was clicked!"); });
```

{: .note}
If you're familiar with Javascript, you're probably familiar with arrow functions. Those are another way to write lambdas in JS!

In Java, you can use lambdas to specify the action in a thread:

```java
// Java thread example
public class LambdaThreadExample {
   public static void main(String args[]) {
    final int count = 50000;
    Thread t = new Thread(() -> {
      for(int i=0; i < count; i++)
         System.out.println("Child Thread: "+ i); 
    });

    t.start(); // Start the background thread
    
    // Main Thread
    for(int j=0; j < 100000; j++)
      System.out.println("Main Thread: "+ j);
   }
}
```

### Partial Function Application

When you call a function with less than the full number of arguments this is called "Partial Function Application" or "Partial Application."

Formally speaking, partial function application is an operation where we define a new function `g` by combining:

- An existing function `f` that takes one or more arguments, with
- Default values for one or more of those arguments

The new function `g` is a specialization of `f`, with hard-coded values for some of `f`'s parameters.

Once defined, we can then call `g` with those arguments that have not yet been hard-coded.

Let's look at some examples:

```console
ghci> product_of x y z = x*y*z 
ghci> product_5 = product_of 5 -- product_5 y z = 5 * y * z
ghci> product_5 2 3
30
```

Here we use PFA to create a specialized function that gets the product of 5 and 2 more values.


```console
ghci> product_5_6 = product_of 5 6 -- product_5_6 z = 5 * 6 * z
ghci> product_5_6 2 
60
```

We can take things a step furthur and fix the second argument to be 6. So now we have a function that finds the product of 5, 6, and some other value.

Here's a similar example with strings:

```console
ghci> yell what name = what ++ " " ++ name ++ "!"
ghci> yell_greeting = yell "hello"
ghci> yell_greeting "arathi"
"hello arathi!"
```

Partial function applications can be useful when combined with pre-existing functions and operators. Let's see the following examples:

```console
ghci> cuber = map (\x -> x^3)
ghci> cuber [2,3,5]
[8,27,125]
```

This creates a new mapper that always cubes items in a list.

```console
ghci> keep_odds = filter (\x -> x `mod` 2 == 1)
ghci> keep_odds [1..10]
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
```

This creates a filter function that filters all even values.

```console
ghci> summer = foldl (\acc x -> acc + x) 0
ghci> summer [1..10]
```

Here we create a function that sums all the values in a list.

So how does this all work?? Tune in next lecture to find out!


<!-- Partial function application is deeply related to currying. In fact, when we used `((mult3 2) 3) 5` earlier, we are implicitly doing partial function application. 

{: .note}
Another way to think of partial function application is as anti-currying, or the inverse operation of currying! -->


<!-- But let's see more examples:

```console
ghci> mult3 x y z = x*y*z
ghci> partial = mult3 2
ghci> partial 3 5
30
ghci> multby10_20 = mult3 10 20
ghci> multby10_20 3
```

Here, we are creating two specialized functions `partial y z = 2*y*z` and `multby10_20 z = 10*20*z` with partial application.

Partial function applications can be useful when combined with pre-existing functions and operators. Let's see the following examples:

```console
ghci> add5 = (+) 5
ghci> add5 100
105
```

All of Haskell's operators are just functions! So the `+` sign is basically a function of two arguments.

{: .note }
Surrounding an infix operator with a pair of parentheses converts it to the prefix form which gives you identical behavior to a normal function.

Haskell also allows you to apply partial application to either operand of an infix operator, as shown below. The function produced by the first line is equivalent to `\x -> x / 10`, while the second line produces `\x -> 10 / x`. You can see the behavior by reading the result returned by the `map` function.

```console
ghci> map (/ 10) [100,200,300]
[10.0,20.0,30.0]
ghci> map (10 /) [100,200,300]
[0.1,5.0e-2,3.333333333333333e-2]
```

Here are more examples:

```console
ghci> filter (>= 6) [2,4,6,8,10,3]
[6,8,10]
ghci> map (++ " is LIT!") ["CS32","CS131"]
["CS32 is LIT!","CS131 is LIT!"]
ghci> filter (`elem` ['A'..'Z']) "Not Every Resistor Drives current"
"NERD"
```

In the last example, the pair of backticks turns a function with two arguments into an infix operator so that you can supply the second argument with partial application.

We can even use partial function application to define a partially-specified mapper function:

```console
ghci> cuber = map (\x -> x^3)
ghci> cuber [2,3,5]
[8,27,125]
```

As you can see, with partial function applications often we don't have to define a full function or lambda to do complex processing! -->
