---
title: "Lecture 6: Functional Programming Part 4"
week: 2
original_author: Boyan Ding, Einar Balan
originally_written: 2024-09-27
lecture_date: 2024-10-16
author: Einar Balan
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

{: .note}
This lecture covers slides 112 up to the appendix of the [Intro to Functional Programming deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/19FefQissMlxxopCbKrns7ijwXcuXoTLb/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=116195195091828130661&rtpof=true&sd=true). 

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

## Advanced Topics Cont.

### Currying

Here comes currying, a fundamental concept in functional programming. It might be confusing at first, but don't worry! We're here to help you through it. And as a bonus, some of the  quirks of Haskell can be easily understood once you understand currying. [^3] Partial function application, which we discussed last time, is a direct result of functions in Haskell being curried!

[^3]: For example, recall what happened when we called `:t` on a function. That is a result of functions in Haskell being curried!

By definition, currying transforms a function of multiple arguments to a series of functions of a single argument.

We'll first use an example to get a feeling of what currying is like. Let's say we have a following function `f` in a JS-like language:

```js
function f(x, y, z) { return x + y + z; }
```

When we curry the function `f`, it's converted to the following "nightmare":

```js
function f(x) {
  function g(y) {
    function h(z) {
      return x + y + z;
    }
    return h;
  }
  return g;
}
```

As we can see, the original function is converted into a series of nested functions:

- The number of nested level equals to the number of argument of the original function
- Each function takes a single argument in sequence, starting from the outmost one
- The outer functions returns the nested function in the next level
- The inner-most function does the original computation

Let's say we wanted to call our original function like this: `f(10, 20, 30)`

If we want to achieve the same effect with curried version

```js
temp_func1 = f(10);
temp_func2 = temp_func1(20);
final_result = temp_func2(30);
```

According to the closure we have just learned, each call above fills in one variable (`x` and `y` respectively). When we do the final call, only the last parameter is needed and we get the result we want.

Or more concisely, we can do it on a single line: `final_result = f(10)(20)(30)`

As it turns out, every function with two or more parameters can be represented in curried form!

{: .note }
It's called "currying" because our friend, Haskell Curry, came up with the approach. (Well, in fact Moses Schönfinkel first had the idea several years before. It could have been called Schönfinkelisation...)

Formally, Currying is the concept that you can represent any function that takes multiple arguments by another that takes a single argument and returns a new function that takes the next argument, etc.

It turns the function `y = f(a, b, c)` into `y = ((f_c a) b) c`.

Each function takes one argument and returns another function as its result (except for the last function which returns the result).

We can represent currying with the following pseudeocode:

```
Curry(Function f)
  e = The expression/body of function f
  For each parameter p from right to left:
    f_temp = Define a new lambda function with:
      1. p as its only parameter
      2. e as its (expression)
    e = f_temp
return f_temp
```

Let's use the procedure above to curry the function `mult3 x y z = x*y*z`

- At first, `e` is equal to `x*y*z`
- Then we enter the for loop
  - In the first iteration, `z` is the parameter to be handled. `f_temp = \z -> x*y*z`
  - Next, we handle `y` and `f_temp = \y -> (\z -> x*y*z)`
  - Finally, we handle `y` and we get `f_temp = \x -> (\y -> (\z -> x*y*z))`

Thus, the curried version `mult3c = \x -> (\y -> (\z -> x*y*z))`.

Let's see how we call our curried function with `x=2`, `y=3` and `z=5`!

```console
ghci> mult3c = \x -> (\y -> (\z -> x*y*z))
ghci> f1 = mult3c 2
ghci> f2 = f1 3
ghci> result = f2 5
30
```

So, what actually are `f1` and `f2`?

`f1` is obtained by calling the lambda of `mult3c` with `x=2`. Thus we replace the occurrences of `x` inside the lambda function with 2 and remove the `\x ->` at the beginning. `f1` is: `\y -> (\z -> 2*y*z)`.

{: .warning }
When a inner lambda has the same parameter name as the outer one. The inner one takes precedence and _shadows_ the outer one. In this case, the shadowed parameter will not get replaced. For example, when we evaluate `(\x -> ((\x -> x) (x + 1))) 3`, we will get `((\x -> x) (3 + 1))`.

Once again, when we repeat the process, we can get `f2 = \z -> (2*3*z)`, and finally `result = 2*3*5`, thus 30.

In fact, every time you define a function of more than parameter in Haskell, Haskell automatically and invisibly **curries it** for you.

This is evidenced by the fact that even if you replace the `mult3c` above with the "normal" `mult3 x y z = x*y*z`, you will get the same result. You can also legally execute `(((mult3 2) 3) 5)` in Haskell and get 30.

Surprising fact: Our usual way of calling functions `mult3 2 3 5` looks like a _single call_ with three arguments, but it's really _three calls_ to three different functions! What happen's is exactly identical to `(((mult3 2) 3) 5)`, thus we know function invocation is _left associative_.

Also, now we can reveal the fact about Haskell function type signatures:

Remember those ugly (and maybe confusing) Haskell type signatures?

```hs
mult3 :: Double -> Double -> Double -> Double
mult3 x y z = x * y * z
```

Well, here's what they should really look like given that all functions are curried (thus `mult3` is a three-level nested function that returns a function at each outer level):

```hs
mult3 :: Double -> (Double -> (Double -> Double))
mult3 x y z = x * y * z
```

Although the latter form looks more _fundamental_, it is even uglier. That's why we used some more syntactic sugar to remove the parentheses. (We can regard the `->` "operator" in type signatures as **right-associative**)

People may ask, why does Haskell curry functions? We think there are two primary reasons:

- First, it enables partial function application. When we call a function with less than the full number of arguments, the curried function will return closure(s) that incorporate each value! Very cool!
- But mostly it appears to be motivated by theorists! It can facilitate program analysis and other stuff and it is consistent with the _lambda calculus_, the mathematical foundation of functional programming.

### Algebraic Data Types

Algebraic Data Type (ADT) is the term we use in functional programming to describe a user-defined data type that can have multiple fields.

The closest thing to algebraic data types would be C++ structs and enumerated types. We use algebraic data types to create complex data structures like trees.

In Haskell, we use the `data` keyword to define algebraic data types.

The simplest algebraic data types are just like C++ enums.

<!-- ```hs
data Drink = Water | Coke | Sprite | Redbull
data Veggie = Broccoli | Lettuce | Tomato
data Protein = Eggs | Beef | Chicken | Beans
```

For the `Protein` type, its equivalent in C++ would be:

```cpp
enum Protein { Eggs, beef, chicken, Beans };
```

We can also define more complex ADTs where each variant also has one or more fields (like C++ struct).

```hs
data Meal =
 Breakfast Drink Protein |
 Lunch Drink Protein Veggie |
 Dinner Drink Protein Protein Veggie |
 Fasting
```

The definition of first variant `Breakfast` means that it is comprised of `Drink` and `Protein` fields. Its equivalent in C++ would be:

```cpp
struct Breakfast {
  Drink d;
  Protein p;
}
```

The only difference is, the fields in Haskell does not have a name, and they are distuished by the order they appear in the definition.

Note that the variants with and without fields can coexist within a single ADT, the `Fasting` above is just an example.

Here are some examples to define variables with ADT:

```hs
careys_meal = Breakfast Redbull Eggs
pauls_meal = Lunch Water Chicken Broccoli
davids_meal = Fasting
```

#### Syntax

We use another example to introduce the syntax of Algebraic Data Types -->

Here is one way to define an ADT in Haskell:

```hs
data Color = Red | Green | Blue

data Shape =
  Circle    { radius :: Float,
              color :: Color } |
  Rectangle { width :: Float, 
              height :: Float, 
              color :: Color } |
  Triangle  { base :: Float, 
              height :: Float, 
              color :: Color } |
  Shapeless
  deriving Show

my_color = Red
my_circ = Circle { radius = 5.0, 
                   color = Blue }
```
In English, a `Shape` can be either a `Circle`, `Rectange`, `Triangle`, or `Shapeless`. A `Circle` has a `radius` and a `color`. A `Rectangle` has a `width`, a `height`, and a `color`. A `Triangle` has a `base`, `height`, and a `color`. Finally, `Shapeless` has no fields.

We can also use a more compact syntax as follows:

```hs
data Color = Red | Green | Blue

data Shape =
         -- radius color
  Circle    Float  Color | 
         -- width  height color
  Rectangle Float  Float  Color |
         -- base   height color
  Triangle  Float  Float  Color |
         -- no fields
  Shapeless
  deriving Show

my_color = Red
my_circ = Circle 5.0 Blue
```
You can use the compact syntax for `my_color` and `my_circ` regardless of how you define your ADT.

{: .note}
Add the keywords "deriving Show" at the end of a definition and GHCi will let us print out the field values!

```console
ghci> :load algebraic
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( lambda.hs, interpreted )
ghci> c = Circle 5 6 10 Red
ghci> c
Circle 5.0 6.0 10.0 Red
ghci> r = Rectangle 0 0 5 6 Blue
ghci> r
Rectangle 0.0 0.0 5.0 6.0 Blue
ghci> :t r
r :: Shape
ghci> colors = [Red, Red, Blue]
ghci> colors
[Red,Red,Blue]
```
Note that the fields of a variant have no names! That means we must use their order/position to identify them.

#### Pattern Matching with ADT

In functional languages, we use pattern matching to process algebraic variables.

Let's see an example with our shapes. 

```hs
-- shapes.hs

data Color = Red | Green | Blue

data Shape =
         -- radius color
  Circle    Float  Color | 
         -- width  height color
  Rectangle Float  Float  Color |
         -- base   height color
  Triangle  Float  Float  Color |
         -- no fields
  Shapeless

getArea :: Shape -> Double
getArea Shapeless = 0
getArea (Circle _ _ r) = pi * r^2
getArea (Rectangle x1 y1 x2 y2) =
  (abs (x2-x1)) * (abs (y2-y1))
```

We focus on the `getArea` function:

- The first line is the type signature. As this functions operates on various types of `Shape`, this definition makes sense.
- Then follows the actual pattern matching
  - The first line means: "If the user passes in a Shapeless variable, then always return zero".
  - The second line handles the `Circle` case. It gets the third field (radius), placing it into variable `r` and computes the area.
  - The last line handles `Rectangle`. It extracts the fields from the data structure and computes the area according to the width and height.

<!-- {: .note }
We can combine pattern matching on ADT with lists and tuples to create complex patterns. For example, the following function counts the occurrences of `Circle` within a list of `Shape` without using `map`, `filter` or `foldl`.

```hs
count_circle :: [Shape] -> Integer
count_circle [] = 0
count_circle ((Circle _ _ _):xs) = 1 + count_circle xs
count_circle (_:xs) = count_circle xs
```

Exercise: Implement count_circle with `map`, `filter` and `foldl` respectively. -->

#### Creating Lists with ADTs

Let's examine a more interesting use of ADts--creating our own linked list.

Here's the defintion:

```hs
data List = 
  Nil | 
  Node { 
    val  :: Integer, 
    next :: List 
  } 
  deriving Show
```

A `List` has two possible variants:
- an empty variant called `Nil`
- a `Node` variant that has a value and a reference to the next item in the `List`

Here's how we might use it:

```console
ghci> :load list
Ok, one module loaded.
ghci> list1 = Nil
ghci> list2 = Node 5 list1
ghci> list2
Node {val = 5, next = Nil}
ghci> head = Node 3 ( Node 2 (Node 1 Nil))
ghci> head
Node {val = 3, next = Node {val = 2, next = Node {val = 1, next = Nil}}}
```

Now let's write a function that sums up all the values in a list.

```hs
sumList :: List -> Integer
sumList (Nil) = 0
sumList (Node val next) = 
   val + sumList next
```

Here's how it works:
- we take a list to traverse
- for an empty list (`Nil`) we return 0
- for a non-empty list (`Node`) we return the value of the current node plus the sum of the rest of the list

### Immutable Data Structures

Great! Now consider how you might write a function that adds to the end of the list. Is it possible?

Recall one of the core tenets of functional programming: immutability. Unfortunately, to add even a single item to the end would require us to remake the entire list from scratch. This is because we would have to modify the `next` pointer of the last item in the list to point to the new node, forcing us to create a new node for the last item. This sets off a domino effect resulting in us recreating the entire list from scratch.

Inserting a node at the end of an immutable list is O(n)!

Moral of the story: Immutability impacts how you construct data structures, making some more efficient than others in functional languages!

<!-- #### Creating Trees with ADTs

Here's another interesting use of ADTs – creating a binary search tree.

We'll start by looking at the definition of a tree node ADT.

```hs
-- bst.hs
data Tree =
  Nil |
  Node String Tree Tree
```

A tree data type has two possible variants:

- An empty variant indicating that there is no node, like a `nullptr`
- A node variant representing actual nodes.

In this definition, each Node holds a String value, and two other tree data items that can be either `Nil` or `Node`. The first one is the left child of the node, and the second one is the right child. So this is a binary tree.

```console
ghci> :load bst
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( bst.hs, interpreted )
ghci> empty_tree = Nil
ghci> one_node = Node "Lit" Nil Nil
ghci> left_child = Node "Boomer" Nil Nil
ghci> right_child = Node "Zoomer" Nil Nil
ghci> root = Node "Cheugy" left_child right_child
ghci> root
Node "Cheugy" (Node "Boomer" Nil Nil) (Node "Zoomer" Nil Nil)
```

In the end of the code above, we created a tree with three nodes.

With this tree structure, we can implement search algorithm on this BST.

We'll use a classic recursive search function and pattern matching.

```hs
search Nil val = False
search (Node curval left right) val
 | val == curval = True
 | val < curval = search left val
 | otherwise = search right val
``` -->

#### Immutable Trees
Ok, now let's see how to create a function that adds a new node to a tree. We run into similar issues here as with the `List`.

Suppose we create a node N and we want to make it the child of existing node M. We can't just find a node M and change its left or right child to point to the new N due to the immutable nature of variables!

The strategy is, we want to create a new node M', let it point to N and replace the node M we need to change.

But wait... now the new node M is not part of the tree either. But we can just carry it on to create a new node to replace M's parent. Eventually we can do this all the way to the root, and at that point, we can forget about the old tree.

Carey's slides provide a great visualization of this topic.

The following Haskell code implements the logic:

```hs
insert Nil val =
  Node val Nil Nil

insert (Node curval left right) val
  | val == curval =
      Node curval left right
  | val < curval =
      Node curval (insert left val) right
  | val > curval =
      Node curval left (insert right val)
```

This method sounds a little bit wasteful, because we need to create new nodes all the way up. However, if we think carefully about the process, we'll find that to add a new node, we just need to generate replacement nodes for the nodes between our new node and the root. Then if a tree is balanced with `n` nodes, we need to create just `log2(n)` new nodes!

Meanwhile, with the creation of the new node, the old nodes will no longer be used. This is where "Garbage Collection" comes in.

Garbage Collection is a language feature that automatically reclaims unused variables, and all functional languages have built-in Garbage Collection.

We'll learn more about GC later in the course, but the important thing is that GC doesn't impact Big-O!

#### Immutable Data Structures - Pros and Cons

Clearly immutability impacts the efficiency of some data structures. However, there are also big benefits to immutable data structures:

1. **They're thread safe!** There are no race conditions, so there's no need for synchronization.
2. **They're easier to debug!** Since objects cannot change unexpectedly, identifying the origin of issues becomes less difficult.
3. **They're cache friendly!** Caches do not need to be frequently updated or invalidated, improving cache hit rates.

<!-- Although here we see that immutable tree is efficient (in the sense it does not change the Big-O bound of operations). It does not apply to all data structures.

For example, if hash tables are implemented as immutable, the insertion will be inefficient because you must regenerate the full array of n buckets every time you add a new item. -->

#### Influencer Alert: Immutability
Many languages now provide immutable data structures.

Examples include Google's Guava library for Java, and immutable.js for JavaScript.

```java
// Java Guava immutability example
Set<Integer> oldSet = ImmutableSet.of(1,2,3,4);

// Generate a whole new set, with 5 added to it
Set<Integer> newSet = new ImmutableSet.Builder<Integer>().addAll(oldSet)
                               .add(5)
                               .build();
```

```js
// JavaScript immutable.js example

// Create a new immutable set of 1-4
const oldSet = Immutable.Set([1,2,3,4]);

// add returns a new set & doesn't change orig.
const newSet = oldSet.add(5)
```

#### Influencer Alter: Garbage Collection:
Most modern languages like Java, JavaScript, C#, and Go are fundamentally based upon garbage collection! 

We'll do a deep dive into garbage collection later on in the course.


### Summary

In summary, here is what we have learned about functional programming

- Every function must take an argument.
- Every function must return a value.
- Functions are "pure" and have no side effects
- Calling the same function with the same input always returns the same result.
- All variables are "immutable" and can never be modified!
- Functions are just like any other data and can be stored in variables and passed as arguments.

And as we have seen along the way, while there are no purely functional languages in mainstream use, the paradigm has influenced every major language.

{: .note }
This concludes our introduction to Haskell and functional programming. Hope you had fun!
