---
title: 12. Function Palooza 3
week: 5
lecture_date: 2024-11-6
author: Einar Balan
originally_written: 2022-10-24
original_author: Boyan Ding, Matt Wang, and Siddarth Krishnamoorthy
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

{: .note}
This lecture note covers slides 48-86 of Function Palooza.

### Exception Handling

With other error handling approaches, error checking is woven directly into the code, making it harder to understand the core business logic.

With exception handling, we separate the handling of exceptional situations/unexpected errors from the core problem-solving logic of our program. Thus, errors are communicated and handled independently of the mainline logic. This allows us to create more readable code that focuses on the problem we're trying to solve and isn't littered with extraneous error checks that complicate the code.

#### Participants of Exception Handling

There are two participants with exception handling: a catcher and a thrower.

A **catcher** has two parts:

1. A block of code that "tries" to complete one or more operations that might result in an unexpected error.
2. An "exception handler" that runs if (and only if) an error occurs during the tried operations, and deals with the error.

```cpp
void f() {
  try {
    g();
    h();   // Might have an unexpected error
    i();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);   // Deals with the error if one occurs
  }
}
```

In the C++ code above. The block of code within `try` belongs to the first part of the catcher, which contains the call to function `h`, which might result in an error. On the other hand, the following `catch` block is the second part. It contains the error handler, and it will only be executed in case an error happens.

The **thrower** is a function that performs an operation that might result in an error. If an error occurs, the thrower creates an exception object containing details about the error, and "throws" it to the exception handler to deal with.

A C++ example might look like the following:

```cpp
void h() {
  // Next command might fail!
  if (some_operation() == failure)
    throw runtime_error("details..");

  op_succeeded_so_do_other_stuff();
  do_even_more_stuff();
  finish_with_more_stuff();
}
```

If any operation performed in the try block results in a thrown exception, the exception is immediately passed to the exception handler (in the catch block) for processing.

Let's say in the function `f`, an failure occurs inside function `h` as shown in the code, it throws an exception at the `throw` in the code above.

- when the exception is thrown within `h`, it is immediately exited, and the remaining statements are skipped. It acts as if the function `h` immediately returns.
- all remaining statements in the try block within `f` are also skipped.
- the execution flow goes into the exception handler within the `catch` block instead. The exception handler processes the exception and figures out how to proceed.
- finally, when the exception handler completes, execution continues normally.

#### Execution Flow

Let's use another exemple to illustrate the execution flow with exception handling.

{: .note }
There's a neat graphic in the slides for this; I'd check it out.

```cpp
void f() {
  do_thing0();
  try {
    do_thing1();
    do_thing2();
    do_thing3();
    do_thing4();
    do_thing5();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue1(e);
    deal_with_issue2(e);
  }
  do_post_thing1();
  do_post_thing2();
}
```

If we assume there is an exception generated in `do_thing3()`, the execution flow of function `f` is:

* `do_thing0`
* `do_thing1`
* `do_thing2`
* `do_thing3`
* `deal_with_issue1`
* `deal_with_issue2`
* `do_post_thing1`
* `do_post_thing2`

On the other hand, when no exception is generated, the execution flow will be:

* `do_thing0`
* `do_thing1`
* `do_thing2`
* `do_thing3`
* `do_thing4`
* `do_thing5`
* `do_post_thing1`
* `do_post_thing2`

#### What is An Exception?

An exception is an object with one or more fields which describe an exceptional situation.

At a minimum, every exception has a way to get a description of the problem that occurred, e.g., "division by zero."

But programmers can also use subclassing to create their own exception classes and encode other relevant info. The following C++ code demonstrates the creation of a custom exception.

```cpp
class WebsiteException:
           public std::exception {
public:
 WebsiteException(const string& website,
                  int http_error) {
    website_ = website;
    http_error_code_ = http_error;
 }

 string get_website_url() const
    { return website_; }
 string get_http_error_code () const
    { return http_error_code_; }
 const char* what() const noexcept
    { return "Unable to connect to URL\n";}
private:
  string website_;
  int http_error_code_; // eg, 404 access denied
};

// ...
HttpStatus s = connect(url);
if (s != OK)
  throw WebsiteException(url, s.getHTTPStatus());
```

#### The Exception Hierarchy

In fact, an exception may be thrown an arbitrary number of levels down from the catcher.

```cpp
void h() {
  if (some_op() == failure)
    throw runtime_error("deets");

  do_other_stuff();
}

void g() {
  some_intermediate_code();
  h();
  some_more_code();
}

void f() {
  try {
    cout << "Before!\n";
    g();
    cout << "After!\n";
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```

In the C++ example above, when function `h` throws an exception, it will automatically terminate every intervening function (`g` in the example) on its way back to the handler (`f`).

Additionally, an exception handler can specify exactly what type of exception(s) it handles. A thrown exception will be directed to the _closest_ handler (in the call stack) that _covers its exception type_.

```cpp
void h() {
  throw out_of_range("negative index");
}

void g() {
  try {
    h();
  }
  catch (invalid_argument &e) {
    deal_with_invalid_argument_err(e);
  }
}

void f() {
  try {
    g();
  }
  catch (overflow_error &e) {
    deal_with_arithmetic_overflow(e);
  }
  catch (out_of_range &e) {
    deal_with_out_of_range_error(e);
  }
}
```

In the code above, the `out_of_range` exception thrown in `h` is caught by the second `catch` block in `f`.

If an exception is thrown for which there is no compatible handler, the program will just _terminate_. This is the equivalent of a "panic" which basically terminates the program when an unhandle-able error occurs.

It turns out that different types of exceptions are derived from more basic types of exceptions. For example, C++ has an exception hierarchy, where `std::exception` is the base class of all exceptions.

So if you want to create a catch-all handler, you can have it specify a (more) basic exception class. That handler will deal with the base exception type and all of its subclassed exceptions.

#### Finally

Some languages, like Java, introduced a third component to a catcher to make error handling simpler. This third component is called a `finally` block and it's guaranteed to run whether the try block succeeds or throws. This enables you to place your "cleanup" code in a single place, yet guarantee it runs in both error and success situations. Here is an example of some code that uses `finally` in Java.

```java
// Java "finally" block
public class FileSaver {
  public void saveDataToFile(String filename,
				String data) {
    FileWriter writer = null;
    try {
      // Next 2 lines might throw IOExceptions
      writer = new FileWriter(filename);
      writer.write(data);
    }
    catch (IOException e) {
      e.printStackTrace();  // debug info
    }
    finally {
      if (writer != null)
        writer.close();
    }
  }
}
```
In the above example, the code in the `finally` block always executes, regardless of whether or not the code in the `try` block throws an exception.

#### Exceptions and memory safety
Exceptions can create all sorts of bugs if not used appropriately. To see how that can happen, consider the following example in C++.
```cpp
void h() {
  if (some_op() == failure)
    throw runtime_error("deets");

  do_other_stuff();
}
void g() {
  int* arr = new int[100];
  h();
  // code uses array here... 
  delete[] arr;
}
void f() {
  try {
    g();
  }
  catch (Exception &e) {
    deal_with_issue(e);
  }
}
```
What happens if `h` throws a `runtime_error`? Notice that in `g`, the memory allocated using `new` is never freed, thus causing a memory leak! So you should be wary of using exceptions in languages *without* automatic memory management (like C++).

{: .note }
In languages like C++, you can still use exceptions without worrying about memory leaks if you use [Smart pointers](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory).

Some languages like Java force you to annotate functions which throw exceptions with a special token (in the case of Java, you must annotate functions that throw with the `throws` keyword). This way, you will know if you need to catch an exception when you call a function.
```java
// Java functions must explicitly 
// declare their exceptions!
public class MyClass {
  void h() throws IOException {
    if (some_op() == fail_to_open_file)
      throw new IOException("File mising!");
  }
    
  void g() throws IOException {
    h();
    // other code
  }
    
  public void f() {
    try {
      g();
    }
    catch(IOException e) {
      deal_with_issue(e);
    }
  }
}
```

{: .note }
Another big drawback of exceptions is that they are extremely slow when they are thrown!

Here are a few more examples of exceptions in other languages.
* **Swift**

```swift
// Swift exception handling example
enum VendErr: Error {   
    case invalidSelection(selection: String)
    case invalidBill(billValue: Int)
}

class VendingMachine { 
  var dollarsInserted: Int

  func insertMoney(dollars: Int) throws {
    if (dollars != 1 && dollars != 5 && dollars != 10) 
      { throw VendErr.invalidBill(billValue: dollars) }
    dollarsInserted += dollars 
  }

  func buyItem(itemCode: String) throws -> String {
     if itemCode == "A1" && dollarsInserted >= 2 {
        dollarsInserted -= 2 
        return "KitKat"
    } 
    // We got nuthin left!
    throw VendErr.invalidSelection(selection: itemCode)
  } 
}
...
var vm = VendingMachine()
do {
    try vm.insertMoney(dollars:10);
    let item = try vm.buyItem(itemCode: "b3");
    print("Ate \(item). Yum!")
} catch VendErr.invalidSelection {
    print("Invalid Selection.")
} catch VendErr.invalidBill(let billSize) {
    print("Counterfeit $\(billSize) bill!")
}
```

* **Python**

```python
# python exception handling example
def getNumbers(howMany): 
  if howMany < 0:   
    raise ValueError("howMany was < 0")
  return [str(i) for i in range(howMany)]

def saveNums(filename, howMany): 
  try:   
    f = open(filename, "w")   
    try:
       nums = getNumbers(howMany)
       f.write(' '.join(nums))
    except ValueError as ve: 
       print("Had a value error:",ve)
    except IOError:
      print("Badness saving to file")   
    finally:
      f.close()
  except OSError:   
     print("Badness opening file")
```

#### Exception handling guarantees
As we've seen, exception handling can be tricky and difficult to understand. As such, engineers have produced some rules of thumb to ensure exceptions are used in a safe manner. When writing a function, always make sure you meet one of the following guarantees:
* No throw guarantee: A function guarantees it will not throw an exception. If an exception occurs in/below the function, it will handle it internally, and not throw. For example, this is required of destructors, functions that deallocate memory, swapping functions, etc.
* Strong exception guarantee: If a function throws an exception, it guarantees that the program's state will be "rolled-back" to the state just before the function call. For example, `vec.push_back()` ensures the vector doesn't change if the `push_back()` operation fails.
* Basic exception guarantee: If a function throws an exception, it leaves the program in a valid state (no resources are leaked, and all invariants are intact). Here, state may not be rolled back, but at least the program can continue running.

### Panics
Like an exception, a panic is used to abort execution due to an exceptional situation which cannot be recovered from (e.g., an unrecoverable error). Essentially, you can think of a panic as an exception which is never caught, and thus which causes the program to terminate. Panics contain both an error message and a stack trace to provide the programmer with context as to why the software failed.

Here is an example of a panic in C#.
```cs
// C# FailFast panic
class WorstCaseScenario
{
  public void someFunc()
  {
    if (somethingUnrecoverableHappens())
      Environment.FailFast("A catastrophic failure has occurred.");
  }
}
```

### Classify that language
Consider the following program, which computes `a/b` given two values `a` and `b`. What result or error handling approach does this language use?
```rust
use std::io::{Error, ErrorKind};

fn my_div(a:f64, b:f64) -> Result<f64, Error> {
  if b != 0.0 { Ok(a/b) }
  else { Err(Error::new(ErrorKind::Other, 
             "You divided a by zero!"))  }
}

fn main() {
  match my_div(50.0,20.0) {
    Ok(number) => println!("Got {}",number),
    Err(e) => println!("Got an error {}",e),
  };
  match my_div(10.0,0.0) {
    Ok(number) => println!("Got {}",number),
    Err(e) => println!("Got an error {}",e),
  };
}
```
This is an example of a language using result variables for error handling. The language lets you specify either a value or an error type/message for a failure.

{: .note }
The language is actually Rust!

## First Class Functions
In languages with First Class Functions:
* Functions can be passed/returned to/from other functions
* Variables can be assigned to functions
* Functions can be stored in data structures
* Functions can be compared for equality
* Functions can be expressed as anonymous, literal values

Functions here are called "first-class citizens" because they are data objects and can be maniupulated like any other data in a program.

Here are some examples of first class functions in some languages:
* C++

In C++, first-class functions are implemented with function pointers.
```cpp
int square(int val) { return val * val; }
int fivex(int val) { return val * 5; }

using IntToIntFuncPtr = int (*)(int val);

void apply(IntToIntFuncPtr f, int val) {
  cout << "f(" << val << ") is " << f(val) << endl;
}

IntToIntFuncPtr pickAFunc(int r) {
  if (r == 0) return square;
         else return fivex;
}

int main() {
 IntToIntFuncPtr f = pickAFunc(rand() % 2);
  if (f == square) cout << "Picked square\n";
               else cout << "Picked fivex\n";
  apply(f, 10);
}
```

* Go

```golang
func square(val int) int { return val * val }
func fivex(val int) int  { return val * 5 }

type IntToIntFuncPtr func(int) int

func apply(f IntToIntFuncPtr, val int) {
  fmt.Println("f(", val, ") is ", f(val))
}

func pickAFunc(r int) IntToIntFuncPtr {
  if r == 0 {
    return square
  } else {
    return fivex
  }
}

func main() {
  var f = pickAFunc(rand.Intn(2))
  if f != nil {
    apply(f, 10)
  }
}
```

### Anonymous (Lambda) Functions
A lambda function is a function that does not have a function name – it's anonymous. Typically we pass a lambda function as an argument to another function or store it in a variable. Lambdas are used when a short, temporary function is needed just once in a program, and it doesn't make sense to define a general-purpose named function.

Every lambda has three different parts:
* Free Variables to Capture - What variables defined outside the lambda function should be available for use in the lambda function when it is later called.
* Parameters & Return Type - What parameters does the lambda function take and what type of data does it return.
* Function Body - The body of the lambda function that performs its operations.

### Capture by Value
As the name suggests, in capture by value, only the values of the free variables are captured by the lambda. This means that any changes made to the captured variable inside the lambda will not be reflected outside it. Here is an example of capture by value in C++.
```cpp
// C++ lambda function
auto create_lambda_func() {
  int m = 5;  
  int b = 3;
  return [m,b](int x) -> int { return m*x + b; };
}

int main() {
  auto slope_intercept = create_lambda_func();
  cout << "5*100 + 3 is: " << slope_intercept(100);
}
```

### Capture by Reference
C++ (and some other languages) can also capture values by reference. Here is an example.
```cpp
// C++ lambda function – capture by reference
auto fun_with_lambdas() {
  int q = 0;  
  auto changer = [&q](int x) { q = x; };
  changer(5);
  cout << "q is now: " << q; // Outputs "q is now: 5"
  return changer;
}

int main() {
  auto f = fun_with_lambdas();
}
```

### Capture by Environment
In capture by environment, an object reference to the *lexical environment* where the lambda was created is added to the closure. The *lexical environment* is a data structure that holds a mapping between every in-scope variable and its value. That includes all variables in the current activation record (locals, statics), and all global variables. Python uses capture by environment semantics. Here is an example.
```python
def foo():
  q = 5
  f = lambda x: print("q*x is: ", q*x)
  f(10)
```
When you define the lambda, it creates a closure containing:
* the lambda function itself
* an object reference to the current lexical environment

When running the lambda, it looks up each free variable in the lexical environments to obtain its value. Now consider this slightly modified code.
```python
def foo():
  q = 5
  f = lambda x: print("q*x is: ", q*x)
  f(10) # outputs "q*x is: 50"
  q = q + 1
  f(10) # outputs "q*x is: 60"
```
This outputs both `50` and `60`. This is because even though the lambda was defined when `q = 5`, when the lambda runs, it looks up the latest value of the variable in the lexical environment, and therefore outputs `60`.

### Classify that language
Consider the following program which prints out `7`. What capturing strategy does this language employ?
```js
function make_lambda() {
 let puppies = 4;

 // define lambda function with 1 param
 temp = function (kittens) { 
   s = "pup"
   s = s + "pies + kit"
   s = s + "tens" 

   // eval(s) interprets s as if it were a
   // regular statement in the program
   return eval(s)
  }
  return temp
}

f = make_lambda()
console.log(f(3))
```

Notice that our lambda function never explicitly references `puppies`! So the language can't be capturing by value or reference, so it must use capture by environment. The lambda then constructs the string `"puppies + kittens"`. Then the `eval` function takes it as a parameter and treats it as code, and runs it! So running `puppies+kittens` computes `4+3` and the code outputs `7`.

{: .note }
The language is actually JavaScript!
