---
title: 16. OOP Control Palooza 
week: 9
lecture_date: 2024-11-25
author: Einar Balan
originally_written: 2022-10-24
original_author: Carey Nachenberg
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

{: .note}
This lecture note covers slides 120-146 of OOP Palooza and 1-29 of Control Palooza.


### Subtype Polymorphism

Subtype Polymorphism is the ability to substitute an object of a subtype (e.g., Circle) anywhere a supertype (e.g., Shape) is expected. More technically, S.P. is where code designed to operate on an object of type T operates on an object that is a subtype of T.

```cpp
class Shape { ... };
class Circle: public Shape { ... };

void display(Shape& s) {    // display accepts a Shape (supertype) object
  ...
}

int main() {
  Circle circ(0,0,5);
  display(circ);            // but we're passing in an object that's asubtype of Shape
}
```

As we learned in datapalooza, typing rules state that if a function can operate on a supertype, it can also operate on a subtype! The same holds true for supertypes and subtypes associated with inherited classes! And for classes that implement interfaces!

This also works because the  class associated with the subtype supports the same public interface as the class associated with the supertype:

```cpp
class Washable { // Interface
  virtual void wash() = 0;
  virtual void dry() = 0;
};
class Car: public Washable { ... }

void washAThing(Washable& w) {  // this function  accepts a supertype
  w.wash();
}

void cleaningCrew() {
  Car Subaru;
  washAThing(subaru);  // we're passing a subtype object to the function above
}
```
So we've seen that we can substitute a subtype object anywhere a supertype is expected. This works because the subclass inherits/implements the same interface as its superclass. But that's not enough! We also expect the methods of the subclass to have the same semantics as those in superclass.

Consider these base and derived classes:

```cpp
class Shape {
public:
  virtual double getRotationAngle() const {
      // returns angle in radians
  } 
  ...
};

class Square: public Shape {
public:
  virtual double getRotationAngle() const {
    // returns angle in degrees
  }
  ...
};
```

Notice that our derived class returns the result in degrees, but the base class returns the result in radians?  This would change the semantics of the interface defined by the base class, and is a bad idea.  Imagine if you passed a Square object to a function that operated on Shapes?  Any time it operated on a Square and called getRotationAngle() it would get a result in degrees, when it expected results in radians. This would cause tons of bugs. To ensure this doesn't happen, a derived class should always implement the same semantics as the base class. If a subclass adheres to the interface and semantics of the base class, we can truly substitute any subtype object for a supertype, and our code will still work. This is called the Liskov Substitution Principle, named after computer scientist Barbara Liskov.

#### Subtype Polymorphism in Dynamically-typed Languages?

So far, all of our examples have been with statically-typed languages! 

Question: Can we have subtype polymorphism in dynamically-typed languages like Python? Consider this example:

```python
class Car:
  def speedUp(self, accel):
    ...
  def slowDown(self, decel):
    ...
  def steer(self, angle):
    ...

class HybridCar(Car):
  def speedUp(self, accel):
    ...
  def slowDown(self, decel):
    ...

def drive_car(c):
  c.speedUp(5)

def main():
  prius = HybridCar()
  drive_car(prius)  # is this using subtype polymorphism?

```
Answer:  Nope. Subtype polymorphism occurs when we process a subtype object as if it were an object of the supertype. But in dynamically-typed languages, variables have NO type at all!  For instance, the parameter c in the drive_car(c) class above has no type. So how can we be treating the prius (a subtype) as if it's a supertype (a Car)?  We can't, and we're not.  So we're NOT using subtype polymorphism! This code will work, however (using duck typing)! It's just not subtype polymorphism!

#### Classify That Language: Subtype Polymorphism

Consider the following code. In this language, a "trait" is the name for an interface. Does this program use subtype polymorphism? Why or why not?

```scala
trait Shape {
  def getArea(): Double
  def getPerim(): Double  
}

class Square(side: Double) extends Shape {
  override def getArea(): Double = side * side
  override def getPerim(): Double = 4 * side
}
class Circle(r: Double) extends Shape {
  override def getArea(): Double = Math.PI * r * r
  override def getPerim(): Double = 2 * Math.PI * r
}

def printStats[T <: Shape](s: T): Unit = { 
  println("The area is: " + s.getArea()) 
  println("The perimeter is: " + s.getPerim()) 
}

val square = Square(10.0)
val circle = Circle(1.0)
printStats(square)
printStats(circle)
```
Answer: This program does use subtype polymorphism. We pass a subtype object like square/circle, and treat it like a supertype, using type T, which is designated to be some subtype of a Shape.

### Dynamic Dispatch

Imagine we have a variable var that refers to some object:

```cpp
void foo(Shape& var) { // c++
  cout << var.area();
}
```
or:

```python
def foo(var):
  print(var.area()) 
```

With Dynamic Dispatch, when you call a method on var, e.g.: var.area(), the actual method that gets called is determined at run-time based on the target object that var refers to. The determination is made in one of two ways:
- Based on the target object's class, or
- By seeing if the target object has a matching method (regardless of the object's type or class), and calling it if one was found - in languages without classes and just objects

So dynamic dispatch is the process of figuring out which method to call when a call is made to a virtual method at runtime. Do we call Circle's area() method, Square's area() method, or what?

#### Dynamic Dispatch in Statically-typed Languages

In statically typed languages, the language examines the class of an object at the time of a method call and uses this to "dynamically dispatch" to the class's proper method. Typically this is implemented by adding a hidden pointer into each object which points at a vtable for the class. A vtable is an array of function pointers which points to the proper method implementation to use for the current class.  Every class has its own vtable. Only virtual methods are included in the vtable.  So a Circle object would have a pointer to a vtable pointing to Circle's area() and perimter() methods. And a Square object would have a pointer to a vtable pointing to Square's area() and perimeter() methods.  When the call happens, e.g. var.area(), the vtable associated with the object is consulted and the pointer to the area() function is used to call the proper function.

Dynamic dispatch is NOT used to call regular instance or class methods. Instead a standard function call is used in these cases. For regular instance functions (that are non-virtual) or class/static functions, a function call to them is called "static dispatch," since the proper function to call can be determined at compile time (statically), not at runtime (dynamically).

#### Dynamic Dispatch in Dynamically-typed Languages

In dynamically typed languages, things get more interesting! While a class may define a default set of methods for its objects the programmer can add/remove methods at runtime to classes or sometimes even individual objects! So when a method is called, the language can't necessarily rely upon an object's class or type to figure out what method to use! Here's an example from javascript:

```javascript
// Javascript dynamic dispatch example
function makeThemTalk(p) {
  console.log(p.name + " says: " + p.talk());
}

var person = {
  name: "Alan Kay",
  talk: function() { return "Java is meh"; },
  change: function()
    { this["talk"] = function() { return "I <3 Smalltalk"; } }

};

var bird = {
  name: "bluebird",
  talk: function() { return "Chirp chirp"; }
};

makeThemTalk(person)
person.change()
makeThemTalk(person)
makeThemTalk(bird)
```

So how might a language that allows you to customize methods for individual objects determine which method to call? Answer: The language stores a unique vtable in every object!

#### Dynamic Dispatch Challenge Questions

Question: What is the difference between subtype polymorphism and dynamic dispatch?

Answer: Subtype polymorphism is a statically-typed language concept that allows you to substitute/use a subtype object (e.g., HighPitchedGeek) anywhere code expects a supertype object (e.g., a Geek).  Since the subtype class shares the same public interfaces as the supertype, the compiler knows that the types are compatible and substitution is allowed. 

In contrast, dynamic dispatch is all about determining where to find the right method to call at run-time for virtual/overridable methods. Dynamic dispatch occurs whether or not we have subtype polymorphism, as we've seen in dynamically-typed languages like Ruby and Python.

Question: Is dynamic dispatch slower, faster, or the same speed as static dispatch? Why?

Dynamic dispatch is slower than static dispatch, since we need to look up function pointers in the vtable at runtime before performing the call.  Static dispatch calls are hard-wired at compile time into the generated machine code, and thus much faster (a direct machine language call).

#### Classify That Language: Dynamic Dispatch

Consider the following classes...

```cpp
class Geek {
public:
  void tickleMe() { 
    laugh(); 
  }
  virtual void laugh()
    { cout << “ha ha!”; }
};

class HighPitchGeek: public Geek {
public:
  virtual void laugh()
    { cout << “tee hee hee”; }
};

int main() {
  Geek *p = new HighPitchGeek;
  
  p->tickleMe(); // ?

  delete p;
} 
```

Question: Will dynamic dispatch be used in this program? Also, what will print, and why?
Answer: Yes, it's using dynamic dispatch. This will print "tee hee hee". Why? Because dynamic dispatch always selects the most derived-version of a function to call.  So even though the laugh() method is called by the tickleMe() method which is defined in Geek, the laugh() method has been redefined in HighPitchedGeek, and our object is of type HighPitchedGeek, and so this version is called..

# Controlla-palooza

Everything you never learned about how code executes!

## Expressions

An expression is a combination of values, function calls and operations that, when evaluated, produces an output value. An expression may or may not have side effects.

Which of the following are expressions?
- f(x)*5
-- Yes!
- if (foo)
   cout << "bar";
-- No
- a = 5
-- In some languages, yes. Like in C++ we can do b = a = 5, so a = 5 is an expression that has a side effect and produces a result
- a && (b || c)
-- Yes!
- if a > 5 then a*3 else a*4
-- Yes - in functional languages (or languages with functional features) this if code is an expression, which produces a result of either a*3 or a*4

## Expression Evaluation Order

Consider the following C++ code:

```cpp
int c = 1, d = 2;

int f() {
  ++c;
  return 0;
}

int main() {
  cout << c - d + f() ;
}
```

Or this code:

```cpp
int c = 0; 

int f() {
  ++c;
  return c;
}

void h(int a, int b)
  { cout << a << " "<< b; }

int main() {
  h(c, f());
}
```

Challenge: What will these C++ programs print?  
The first program produces either -1 or 0
The second program produces either 0 1 or 1 1

Why? C++ doesn't specify what order the terms of an arithmetic expression must be evaluated! Nor does it specify what order parameters must be evaluated! Some languages mandate a left-to-right eval order (C#, Java, JavaScript, Swift), while others don't (C++, Rust, OCaml).

So in general, if your expressions are calling functions, those functions shouldn't have side effects that could impact the execution of the other functions called in the expression. Otherwise you'll get unpredictable behavior depending on the compiler and potentially each time you compile the code it could do a different thing!

Why avoid specifiying ane explicit evaluation order? The reason that an ordering is not specified is to give the compiler latitude to optimize the code.

## Associativity

Regardless what order each of the terms are evaluated... Most languages use left-to-right associativity when evaluating mathematical expressions. Which is the way we all learned to do it in school.

So an expression like:

```cpp
cout << c - d + f() ;
```

Would be evaluated as:

```cpp
cout << (c - d) + f() ;
```

Instead of:

```cpp
cout << c - (d + f());
```

There are some notable exceptions, like evaluating exponentiation (e.g., 2^3^2 == 512, since we often evaluate exponentiation from right-to-left).  Assignment is also right-associative, so we can do something like this:

```cpp
  a = b = c = 5;  
  // equivalent to:
  a  = (b = (c = 5));   // so c = 5 runs first, then b = c runs, then a = b runs
```

## Short Circuiting

In any boolean expression with AND /  OR, most languages will evaluate its sub-expressions from left-to-right. The moment the language finds a condition that satisfies or invalidates the boolean expression, it will skip evaluating the rest of the sub-expressions. This can dramatically speed up your code!

For example, this code here:

```cpp
if(is_cute() || is_smart() || is_rich()) {
  date_person();
}
```

Really executes like this:

```cpp
if (is_cute()) 
  date_person();
else if (is_smart())
  date_person();
else if (is_rich())
  date_person();
```

And this code here:

```cpp
if (good_salary() && fun_work() && good_culture()) {
  take_job();
}
```

Really executes like this:

```cpp
if (good_salary()) {
  if (fun_work()) {
    if (good_culture()) {
      take_job();
    }
  }
}
```

Some languages, like Kotlin, have the ability to use boolean expressions with short circuiting and without!  e.g.

```kotlin
fun rich(salary: Int): Boolean {
  if (salary > 200000) return true;
  print("Not in silicon valley!\n")
  return false
}

fun main() {
  val cute = true; val smart = false;
  val salary = 200000;
    
  if (cute == true || smart == true || rich(salary) == true)  // uses short circuiting
    print("You're my type!\n")

  if (cute == true or smart == true or rich(salary) == true)  // no short-circuiting
    print("I still want to date you!\n")
}
```
