---
title: Lecture 19
week: 10
lecture_date: 2023-06-07
author: Ashwin Ranade
originally_written: 2022-11-30
original_author: Ashwin Ranade
layout: lecture
parent: Lecture Notes
---

{: .note }
Ashwin here! This lecture covers [Logic Palooza](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BkSYn8MhlR6B9s2kktWJlFmCJ0y_h0Ji/edit#slide=id.p1) slides 18 - 44. 

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc }

{:toc}
- dummy item

## Unification

As we saw, during the Resolution process, Prolog repeatedly Compares the current goal with each fact/rule to see if they are a match.

If a goal and a fact/rule match, Prolog extracts mappings between variables and atoms (e.g., X->bob).

Together, these two steps (comparison + mapping) between a single goal and a single fact/rule are called **unification**.

Unification pseudocode: 
```
def unify(goal, fact_or_rule, existing_mappings):
   if the goal with the existing mappings matches the current fact/rule:
      mappings = extract variable mappings between goal and fact/rule
      return (True, mappings)	 # We did unify! Return discovered mappings
   otherwise:
      return (False, {})   	# We couldn't unify! So no mappings found
```
- The unification algorithm runs on one goal at a time.
- Unification runs on a single fact or rule at a time.

### Matching a Goal and a Fact/Rule

So how do we determine if a goal with the current mappings matches a specific fact/rule?
1. apply all current mappings to the goal
2. treat both the mapped goal and head of the fact/rule as trees 
3. Compare each node of the goal tree with the corresponding node in the fact/rule tree
  
Use the following comparison rules: 
- If both nodes are functors, then make sure the functors are the same and have the same number of children.
- If both nodes hold atoms, make sure the atoms are the same.
- If a goal node holds an unmapped variable it will match ANY item in the corresponding node of the fact/rule.
- If a fact/rule node holds an unmapped variable it will match ANY item in the corresponding node of the goal.

Note: The animations do a really good job of explaining this -- they are slides 20-21 of the Prolog lecture. I'll do my best, but it's hard to transcribe into text. 

### Unification: Do They Match
Follow the rules above. Many examples are on ~slides 20-30 of the Prolog presentation; they're hard to transcribe into text. 

Here's one example: 

Assuming we have the mapping `{What->ucla}`, and we are trying to match (1) `likes(gene, What)` with (2) `likes(Y,X)`. 
These *DO MATCH*. 
- we replace `What` with `ucla`, so the children of the `likes` node for (1) becomes `gene` and `ucla`. 
- This matches the children nodes for (2), since they both hold unmapped variables [`Y` and `X` respectively]

### Unification: Extracting Variable Mappings
Once we know that a goal matches a fact/rule, we need to extract the variable mappings.

Approach: 
- Iterate through each corresponding pair of nodes in both trees.
- Any time you find an unmapped Variable in either tree that maps to an atom/number in the other tree, create a mapping between the variable and the atom.
- Any time you find an unmapped Variable in either tree that maps to an unmapped Variable in the other tree, create a bidirectional mapping between the variables.

### Unification: Summary
Unification is the process of: 
- comparing a single goal with a single fact/rule, given the current set of mappings
- determining if the goal and the fact/rule match
- If so, extracting all new mappings between variables and atoms on either side.

Unification is used within the broader Resolution algorithm that we traced through.

## Resolution Continued
Here's a simplified version of the Resolution algorithm, showing where Unification fits in.


```
def resolution(database, goals, cur_mappings):
  if there are no goals left:
    tell the user we found a solution and output our discovered mappings!
    return
  for each fact/rule z in the database:
    success, new_mappings = unify(goals[0], fact_or_rule, cur_mappings)
    if success:
      tmp_mappings = cur_mappings + new_mappings
      tmp_goals = sub_goals(z) + goals[1:]
      resolution(database, tmp_goals, tmp_mappings)    # recursion
  # if we get here, we didn't find a match... BACKTRACK and keep trying!
```

The Resolution algorithm is initially called with the user's query as its only goal, and with no initial mappings.
```
# Determine if ann the grandparent of cas?
resolution(database, "gparent(ann, cas)", { })
```

## Prolog Lists
Lists in Prolog are just like lists in Haskell or Python.

Lists can contain numbers, atoms, or other lists.


```
[ ]
[silly, goofy, gleeful]
[1, 2, [dog, cat], 3.5]
```

- Prolog uses a combination of pattern matching (like Haskell) and unification to process lists.
- List processing is also done with facts and rules, just like other inference tasks.

Firstly, here's a Prolog fact with **variables** inside of atoms. 


```
is_the_same(X,X)

is_the_same(lit,lit) --> returns true
is_the_same(ucla,usc) --> returns false
```

Now, time for some Prolog lists!
### Example 1
```
is_head_item(X,[X | XS]).
```
This [X | XS] syntax is Prolog's equivalent of pattern matching, 
just like (x:xs) in Haskell.

X matches the first item of the list.
XS matches the rest of the list.


```
is_head_item(lit, [lit, dank, snack]) --> returns true
is_head_item(drip, [lit,dank,snack]) --> returns false
```

**Explanation:** Prolog is unifying from left-to-right and mapping each variable.
- Once it extracts a mapping, it only "unifies" the query if later uses of the mapping are consistent with the first.

We can also do: 
### Example 2
```
is_second_item(Y, [X, Y | XS]).
```
 [X, Y | XS] equivalent of (x:y:xs) in Haskell.

X matches the first item of the list.
Y matches the second item of the list.
XS matches the rest of the list.

```
is_head_item(dank, [lit, dank, snack]) --> returns true
is_head_item(lit, [lit,dank,snack]) --> returns false
```

### Example 3: Checking if a list contains a value

```
is_member(X,[X|Tail]). 
is_member(Y,[Head|Tail]) :- is_member(Y,Tail). 
```

If we query `is_member(dank,[lit,dank,snack])`: 
- we first try and match the first fact, but it's false
- so we match on the second rule, which turns out to unify, so we return True!

### Example 4: Deleting an atom from a list

The general form will be:
delete(ItemToDelete, ListToDeleteFrom, ResultingList)

A query could look like this:
delete(carey, [paul, carey, david], X)  -->  X = [paul, david] 


```
delete(Item, [Item | Tail], Tail).  
delete(Item_, [Head_ | Tail_], [Head_ | FinalTail])  :-  delete(Item_, Tail_, FinalTail).
```

The first line is like we saw earlier – it handles the base case.
- The base case handles the situation where the first item in the list is the one we want to delete, e.g.:
delete(carey, [carey, david, paul], X)

The second line handles the case where the item we want to delete ISN'T the first item, e.g.:
delete(david, [carey, david, paul], X)
- Our rule uses pattern matching to break up the input list into the Head item and all Tail items.
- the subgoal: "Use delete to remove the Item from amongst the Tail items; FinalTail refers to the resulting tail"
- In this case, we construct our output list by concatenating the Head item from our original list with the tail of the list with the Item removed from it.

## Prolog List Processing: Built-in Facts and Rules

append(X,Y,Z)
```
Determines if list X concatenated with list Y is equal to list Z
append([1,2],[3,4],[1,2,3,4]) yields True
append([1,2],X,[1,2,3,4]) yields X -> [3,4]
```

sort(X,Y)

```
Determines if the elements in Y are the same elements of X, but in sorted order
sort([4,3,1], [1,3,4]) yields True
sort([4,3,1],X) yields X -> [1,3,4]
```

permutation(X,Y)

```
Determines if the elements in Y are the same elements of X, but in a different ordering

permutation([4,3,1], [3,1,4]) yields True
```

reverse(X,Y)

```
Determines if list X is the reverse of list Y

reverse([1,2,3],[3,2,1]) yields True
reverse([1,2,3],X) yields X -> [3,2,1]
```

member(X,Y)

```
Determines if X is a member of the list Y

member(6, [1,6,4]) yields True
member(X,[1,6,4]) yields X -> 1, X -> 6, and X -> 4
```

sum_list(X,Y)

```
Determines if the sum of all elements in X add up to Y
sum_list([4,3,1], 8) yields True
sum_list([4,3,1], Q) yields Q -> 8
```

## Prolog List Syntax is Syntactic Sugar For Functors and Atoms!

Notice that when you remove the syntactic sugar, list processing is implemented just like any other Prolog fact or rule!
- And while we didn't see an example in the slides, the empty list [ ] can similarly be written as the atom nil.

```
The  | operator (as in [X | Tail]) can be replaced with a fact named "cons" that takes two arguments.
- [X|Tail] --> cons(X,Tail)`
```

original facts/rules: 
```
is_member(X, [X | Tail]).
is_member(Y, [Head | Tail]) :- is_member(Y, Tail).
```

rewritten: 
```
is_member(X, cons(X,  Tail)).
is_member(Y, cons(Head, Tail)) :- is_member(Y, Tail).
```
